index.md, before:

---
layout: lesson
root: .  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
permalink: index.html  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
---

<iframe width="427" height="251" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed?v=7EPn4FGFG3k&list=PLKZ9c4ONm-VmHsMKImIDEMsZI1Vp0UY-Z&ab_channel=HEPSoftwareFoundation" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This tutorial explores Machine Learning using scikit-learn and TensorFlow for applications in high energy physics.

Extended from a [version developed by Luke Polson for the 2020 USATLAS Computing Bootcamp](https://lukepolson.github.io/HEP_ML_Lessons/).

<!-- this is an html comment -->

{% comment %} This is a comment in Liquid {% endcomment %}


> ## Prerequisites
> * A [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/) account. Click [here to create an account](https://www.kaggle.com/account/login?phase=startRegisterTab&returnUrl=%2F)
> * Basic Python knowledge, e.g. through the [Software Carpentry Programming with Python lesson](https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/) 
{: .prereq}

Introduction
------------

Machine learning is everywhere in modern "big-data" science. As physicists and big-data scientists, it's a good idea to know a bit about machine learning.

The aim of this lesson is to:
- explore what it means to build a machine learning model
- expand on concepts in machine learning that are essential to anyone working in big-data science

> ## The skills we'll focus on:
>
> 1.  Understanding a bit about machine learning
> 2.  Preparing data for machine learning
> 3.  Training some machine learning models
> 4.  Comparing some machine learning models
{: .checklist}

{% include curriculum.html %}

Videos are provided at the top of each page to help guide you. For the sections without coding (Introduction, Mathematical Foundations, Neural Networks) the videos essentially take you through the text, so choose whichever way you learn best: video or reading. For the remaining sections, the videos take you through the coding live.

{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

Add arrows in setup to indicate where to click

index.md, after:

---
layout: lesson
root: .  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
permalink: index.html  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
---

<iframe width="427" height="251" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed?v=7EPn4FGFG3k&list=PLKZ9c4ONm-VmHsMKImIDEMsZI1Vp0UY-Z&ab_channel=HEPSoftwareFoundation" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This tutorial explores Machine Learning using scikit-learn and TensorFlow for applications in high energy physics.

Extended from a [version developed by Luke Polson for the 2020 USATLAS Computing Bootcamp](https://lukepolson.github.io/HEP_ML_Lessons/).

<!-- this is an html comment -->

{% comment %} This is a comment in Liquid {% endcomment %}


> ## Prerequisites
> * A [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/) account. Click [here to create an account](https://www.kaggle.com/account/login?phase=startRegisterTab&returnUrl=%2F) as described in the [Setup page](https://hsf-training.github.io/hsf-training-ml-webpage/setup.html)
> * Basic Python knowledge, e.g. through the [Software Carpentry Programming with Python lesson](https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/) 
{: .prereq}

Introduction
------------

Machine learning is everywhere in modern "big-data" science. As physicists and big-data scientists, it's a good idea to know a bit about machine learning.

The aim of this lesson is to:
- explore what it means to build a machine learning model
- expand on concepts in machine learning that are essential to anyone working in big-data science

> ## The skills we'll focus on:
>
> 1.  Understanding a bit about machine learning
> 2.  Preparing data for machine learning
> 3.  Training some machine learning models
> 4.  Comparing some machine learning models
{: .checklist}

{% include curriculum.html %}

Videos are provided at the top of each page to help guide you. For the sections without coding (Introduction, Mathematical Foundations, Neural Networks) the videos essentially take you through the text, so choose whichever way you learn best: video or reading. For the remaining sections, the videos take you through the coding live.

{% include links.md %}
